# ITS 3100 Labs


The following lab tasks serve to bootstrap the student into the ITS lab environment, review network analysis tools, explore client configurations, and most importantly present the documentation standards that are fundamental to EVERY submission in this course.

# Preface and Warnings

## Variable replacement

Through ALL ITS labs and as a general rule in public documentation various forms of brackets `[ ] < > { }" and quotes are used to signify a variable that must be replaced by the user.  The student is responsible for understanding the context of these strings, but unless otherwise specified the brackets are removed during the replacement.  For example:

`{Ohio-University-Mascot}` becomes `bobcat` NOT `{bobcat}`  

## Defining requirement levels

Lab write-ups use requirement levels that are consistent with [RFC2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc2119/)

## Omissions, Errors, and Changes

The systems that are used to build the labs in this course are real production software and are subject to change.  While the Faculty, Lab Director, and Teaching Assistants attempt to find all issues prior to releasing the labs, it is very likely that changes that regularly occur in these systems will cause disruptions to the labs.

If any part of the lab is unclear for any reason, including formatting and documentation errors in the lab content, the student is 100% responsible for clarifying their observations with the faculty in class or in Teams.

# Industry impetus

The criteria for lab reports in this class are defined by the following observations:

- ALL well maintained enterprise networks are highly documented.
- Network engineers are regularly called upon to identify, resolve, and document complex problems.
- Network engineers must be able to effectively communicate with non-technical contributors (Board of Directors, CEO, CIO, manager, customer, support, purchasing, sales, etc.)

Examples of documents that network engineers may encounter in the industry:

- Proposed changes to an existing network
- Documentation of major outages
- Purchasing requests
- Request for Proposals (RFP)
- Design documentation for new networks.

# Key criteria

A student's lab reports will serve as a demonstration of their documentation skills.  Significant portions of every lab grade will reflect the faculty and graders' subjective opinion of the quality of the report's construction and its effectiveness against the documentation principles listed above.

## Documentation standards

There are many different network documentation standards.  Students SHOULD adopt the class's standards to ensure that their work is easy for the faculty and grader to process. Information on the required attributes and formatting standards can be found at [ITS Lab Reports](../tasks/ITL-Lab-Report.md)  

## Concise answers!

Students are expected to provide <u>concise</u> documentation that completely demonstrates their understanding of the work completed for every task in a lab.   Faculty and Graders will not "search for needles in haystacks" when students dump lengthy data into their lab report.

## Screenshots

Screenshots, images, JPG, etc. as documentation of network data are <u>EXTREMELY</u> rare, and will ONLY be used to document graphical user interfaces (GUI).  GUI interfaces are rare in the industry and even rarer in this class. Command Line Inputs and Outputs should NEVER be documented in screenshots.

This includes Teams conversations!

## Grading rubrics and prompts

Students are advised to check the grading rubric for each class submission, and consider the prompts for each task carefully.

```
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
                READ THAT PART AGAIN
                IGNORE AT YOUR OWN RISK
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^       
```

## Lab 1

- [Task 1 - Student Lab Tools](../tasks/Task-Student-Lab-Tools.md)
    Student should clearly articulate the tools and ecosystems they intend to use during the semester.

- [Task 2 - GitHub Account Creation](../tasks/Task-GitHub-Account-Creation.md)
    EVERY student MUST follow this task even if they completed this task in previous semesters or for other classes. The GitHub username should also be documented in the lab report.

- [Task 3  - Connect to your VM](../tasks/Task-Connect-to-GNS3-VM-Guac.md)
    The Guacamole tool provides a remote desktop and an SSH interface to the gHost.  The SSH access can be helpful in debugging connectivity problems with the gHost, including the infamous "Black Screen of Death".

    The following command fixes the Black Screen of Death, and is left for future reference.  It should NOT normally be needed.

    ```DISPLAY=:10 xmessage -iconic x```

    Find a creative way to demonstrate that you completed this task.  No screenshots!

- [Task 4 - Deploy an Ubuntu Server](../tasks/Task-GNS3-Projects-ubuntu.md)
    Deploy the GNS3 project and use the network information provided on Canvas to assign a static IPv4 and IPv6 address to your server.  Unlike projects in 2300, this server will remain on and will be used for multiple projects. Treat it kindly and with care. Uptime matters. Document the final configuration and show that the server has access to the IPv4 and IPv6 Internet.
  
- [Task 5 - SSH](../tasks/Task-SSH.md)
    Use the IP address assigned to the Ubuntu server as the SSH destination for the next two tasks. 

- [Task 6 - SSH Jump Host](../tasks/Task-SSH-Jumphost.md)
    Show that you are able to effectively connect to and manipulate the Ubuntu Server via SSH from your laptop or PC.

## Helpful reminders
- [Gathering IP Information](../tasks/Task-Gathering-IP-Information.md)
- [Network Diagnostic Tools](../tasks/Task-Advanced-Network-Diagnostic-Commands.md)
- [Wireshark](../tasks/Task-Wireshark.md)
- [Drawing Diagrams](../tasks/Task-Drawing-Diagrams.md)

## Fixing the Black Screen of Death
- Use the Guacamole Web application to SSH to your system.
- run the command `DISPLAY=:10 xmessage -iconic x`
- Check your GUI interface to see if it is recovered


# Optional

- [Remote Desktop to your gHost](../tasks/Task-Connect-to-GNS3-VM.md)
    Professor Saunders uses an alternate mechanism through the Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) to connect to the gHost.  It shouldn't be necessary for this class, but students are welcome to use it instead of Guac.